# Terminology

This section provides a reference for the terminology used in this document.

1. Aggregation function: The function computed over the users' inputs.
1. Aggregator: An endpoint that runs the input-validation protocol and
   accumulates input shares.
1. Batch size: The number of valid input shares accumulated by each aggregator
   before computing the final output.
1. Client: The endpoint from which a user sends data to be aggregated, e.g., a
   web browser.
1. Collector: The endpoint that receives the output of the aggreagtion function.
   It also specifies the parameters of the protocol.
1. False input: An input that is valid, but incorrect. For example, if the data
   being gathered is whether or not users have clicked on a particular button, a
   client could report clicks when none occurred.
1. Helper: An aggregator that is not the leader.
1. Input: The original data emitted by a client, before any encryption or secret
   sharing scheme is applied. This may include multiple measurements.
1. Input share: one of the shares output by feeding an input into a secret
   sharing scheme. Each share is to be transmitted to one of the participating
   aggregators.
1. Input validation protocol: The protocol executed by the client and
   aggregators in order to validate the client's input without leaking its value
   to the aggregators.
1. Invalid input: An input for which the input validation protocol fails. For
   example, if the input is meant to be a  bit vectors, then `[2, 1, 0]` is
   invalid.
1. Leader: A distinguished aggregator that coordinates input validation and data
   collection.
1. Measurement: A single value (e.g., a count) being reported by a client.
   Multiple measurements may be grouped into a single protocol input.
1. Output: A reduction over the inputs, for instance a statistical aggregation,
   which is of interest to a collector. This is the output of the aggregation
   function.
1. Output share: The share of an output emitted by an aggregator. Output shares
   can be reassembled by the leader into the final output.
1. Prio v1: Mozilla's [Origin Telemetry project](https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2019/06/06/next-steps-in-privacy-preserving-telemetry-with-prio/).
1. Prio v2: Contact tracing project by Apple, Google, and ISRG.
1. Proof: A value generated by the client used by the aggregators to verify the
   client's input.
1. Proof share: A share of a proof, used by an aggregator during the
   input-validation protocol.
